Reinstate V3 to V4 Migration Tool (#3377)
mendix/docs: content/developerportal/deploy/migrating-to-v4.md

    You can [create an deployment package](/refguide/create-deployment-package-dialog) of your app within Studio Pro, and upload it to the [Environments](environments) page of the new Mendix Cloud V4 app. Then use the **Deploy** option to deploy it to your chosen environment.

2. Create the application settings manually. The data replication process will only replicate data, it does not copy across other application settings. Settings you will need to set are on the [Environment Details](environments-details) page and include:

    * Number of instances
    * Scheduled Events
    * Constants
    * HTTP headers
    * Path based access restrictions
    * Outgoing connections certificates
    * Custom runtime settings
    * Custom environment variables
    * Preferred maintenance window
    * Tags

    {{% alert type="info" %}}You do not need to set up your **Custom Domains**. When the app is migrated to V4, it will be given the same name as your current app and so your Custom Domain will automatically pick up the V4 app.{{% /alert %}}

### 4.3 Replicating the Data

Now that you have your new Mendix Cloud V4 environment, you can start replicating the data.

> 

Reviewer: New changes to be added:

```
### Two ways to transfer database data

The system is capable of transferring database data from v3 to v4 in the following two ways:

1. Live replication using AWS Database Migration Service (DMS).
2. PostgreSQL dump and restore.

AWS DMS allows changes on v3 to be replicated to v4 as they happen. This means smaller downtime during final migration.
However, it is important to note that sometimes AWS DMS replication fails to transfer the data correctly. When this happens we automatically detect the failure and switch to database dump and restore mode. In this case you will see the "Force database dump restore" checkbox marked automatically on the UI. Dump-restore mode could also be forced from the UI by ticking the “Force database dump restore” checkbox.

### Process with AWS DMS
```

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377/commits/c1ed2798a77249460a15992812bd71515131fb2f

1. Open the [Migration Tool](https://v3-v4-migration.mendixcloud.com/), `https://v3-v4-migration.mendixcloud.com/`.

2. Choose the Mendix Cloud V3 app from the list of apps for which you are the technical contact.

3. The target v4 app node will be filled with the name `<current-app-name>-v4`.

4. Select the source and target environments. In most cases, these will have the same name. For example, you want to replicate data from the V3 `production` environment to the V4 `production` environment.

    ![Select V3 node and environment](attachments/migrating-to-v4/select-v3-node-to-migrate.png)

5. Ensure that the app in the target V4 environment is stopped. You cannot replicate data into an app that is running.

6. Click **Replicate data and files**.

> 

Reviewer: Add a Note here:

```
**NOTE** : Do not mark the "Force database dump restore" checkbox
```

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377/commits/6623947a8d6f583b8237528f5e777545e9efe467

    The replication process will copy all the data in the database, and files based on `FileDocument` entities, such as images, which are stored in the storage of the V3 appnode.

    The replication will continue to run, so any changes to the data while your V3 app is still running are reflected in the replicated data.

7. Click the **Migration** icon to see the status of your replications.

    ![Icon for migration page](attachments/migrating-to-v4/migration-page.png)

> 

Reviewer: New changes to be added here

```
8. Once initial data transfer is complete, progress will be at 100% but data will be kept synchronized from v3 to v4.

### Process with PostgreSQL dump and restore

1. Follow steps 1-5 mentioned above in [Process with AWS DMS](#process-with-aws-dms) .

2. Mark the "Force database dump restore" checkbox and then click **Replicate data and files**.

    The replication process will copy all the data in the database, and files based on `FileDocument` entities, such as images, which are stored in the storage of the V3 appnode.

    This is a one time database copy from v3 to v4 node unlike live replication. This is recommended in the following cases:

    * Database replication with AWS DMS fails to replicate the data correctly
    * Database replication with AWS DMS fails with validation errors

3. Once data transfer is complete, progress will be at 100%.
```

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377/commits/d57ca1d61a9688f81f7d58cae31dc2ef57d1fe77

The migration page lists all the ongoing migrations including the following information:

* the source and target environments
* UUID of the source production environment
* whether the tool is current **Replicating** data to the V4 environment or is **Stopped**
* what proportion of the source data has been replicated, listed for both files and database – this will sometimes show zero
    * if replication isn't running
    * during the replication process when the process checks whether files are synchronized
* UUID of the target production environment

> * a button to **Stop replication** if the tool is currently replicating, or **Start replication** if the tool is currently stopped

Reviewer: Line 140 to be updated like below

```
* a button to **Stop replication** with "interrupt" option if the tool is currently replicating, or **Start replication** if the tool is currently stopped
```

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377/commits/44772b3fbcfd6f72e324fde9c9e148bdf29b5a4a

* the **Migrate button** which triggers the [final migration](#final-migration)
    ![Status of the Migration](attachments/migrating-to-v4/migration-status.png)

### 4.4 Testing the Replicated Data

Once you have replicated your data, you should test it, to ensure that everything is working as expected.

{{% alert type="info" %}}You should wait before testing to ensure the replication progress has reached 100%, otherwise you may find some data is missing.{{% /alert %}}

1. Go to the migration page of the Migration Tool.

> 2. Click **Stop** next to the migration you want to test.

Reviewer: New changes to be added here

```
2. Click **Stop replication** next to the migration you want to test.

    **Note:** If replication is interrupted (i.e. “Interrupt” checkbox is marked) data on v4 could be incomplete, especially if this is done before progress has reached 100%.
   ```

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377/commits/9ae99d23c7f854bb919294f5cf17ab6d362a151a

#### 4.3.2 Process with AWS DMS {#aws-dms}

1. Open the [Migration Tool](https://v3-v4-migration.mendixcloud.com/), `https://v3-v4-migration.mendixcloud.com/`.

2. Choose the Mendix Cloud V3 app from the list of apps for which you are the technical contact.

3. The target v4 app node will be filled with the name `<current-app-name>-v4`.

4. Select the source and target environments. In most cases, these will have the same name. For example, you want to replicate data from the V3 `production` environment to the V4 `production` environment. Please note you should not check the **Force database dump restore** check box.

    ![Select V3 node and environment](attachments/migrating-to-v4/select-v3-node-to-migrate.png)

5. Ensure that the app in the target V4 environment is stopped. You cannot replicate data into an app that is running.

6. Click **Replicate data and files**.

>     The replication process will copy all the data in the database, and files based on `FileDocument` entities, such as images, which are stored in the storage of the V3 appnode.

Reviewer 3: Files are stored on the appnode. IMO we should remove "files based on ..." part altogether and just say "...copy all files and data in the database"

>     The replication process will copy all the data in the database, and files based on `FileDocument` entities, such as images, which are stored in the storage of the V3 appnode.

Reviewer: IIRC we also store files on database if the microflow is designed in such a manner. That is the reason I have mentioned this. Is it not true?

>     The replication process will copy all the data in the database, and files based on `FileDocument` entities, such as images, which are stored in the storage of the V3 appnode.

Reviewer 3: This I don't know :(

>     The replication process will copy all the data in the database, and files based on `FileDocument` entities, such as images, which are stored in the storage of the V3 appnode.

Reviewer 3: It seems we're mixing up stuff here. So if we have `FileDocument` entities in the database (which are basically files, but stored in the database if I understand correctly) then we can mention that. But I don't think this is necessary because database is transferred fully. Why should we emphasize one specific record type? This only complicates things.

In addition to `FileDocument` entities that reside on the dbnode (and are transferred to RDS), there are also ordinary files that reside on the appnode (and are transferred to S3). But we don't mention that. Neither in this paragraph, nor in DMS-related list.

This is why my proposal to simplify this to having only "...copy all files and data in the database" stands.

>     The replication process will copy all the data in the database, and files based on `FileDocument` entities, such as images, which are stored in the storage of the V3 appnode.

Reviewer 3: Or maybe better to say "...copy all file and database records".

>     The replication process will copy all the data in the database, and files based on `FileDocument` entities, such as images, which are stored in the storage of the V3 appnode.

Author: OK,
The thing about a `FileDocument` entity is that it is just a pointer to a file on disk. So when the app wants the content, it actually pulls it from a file, rather than from the table.
But I suppose the customer could have done something else which created files which are _not_ FileDocuments, so I'll make it more general.

    The replication will continue to run, so any changes to the data while your V3 app is still running are reflected in the replicated data.

7. Click the **Migration** icon to see the status of your replications.

    ![Icon for migration page](attachments/migrating-to-v4/migration-page.png)
    
8. Once initial data transfer is complete, progress will be at 100%, but data will be kept synchronized from v3 to v4.

> 

Reviewer: @Adam-Dupaski can you please move the lines 158-171 right here.

```
### Process with PostgreSQL dump and restore

1. Follow steps 1-5 mentioned above in [Process with AWS DMS](#process-with-aws-dms) .

2. Mark the "Force database dump restore" checkbox and then click **Replicate data and files**.

    The replication process will copy all the data in the database, and files based on `FileDocument` entities, such as images, which are stored in the storage of the V3 appnode.

    This is a one time database copy from v3 to v4 node unlike live replication. This is recommended in the following cases:

    * Database replication with AWS DMS fails to replicate the data correctly
    * Database replication with AWS DMS fails with validation errors

3. Once data transfer is complete, progress will be at 100%.
```

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377/commits/4d04e307fbbc2f26b9c242c0712f5e5442ad80b2

#### 4.3.3 Process with PostgreSQL Dump and Restore {#dump-restore}

1. Follow steps 1-5 above in the [Process with AWS DMS](#aws-dms) section.

2.  Select the **Force database dump restore** check box, then click **Replicate data and files**.

    The replication process will copy all the data in the database, including files based on `FileDocument` entities, such as images, which are stored in the storage of the v3 app node.

>     This is a one-time database copy from the v3 to v4 node, unlike live replication. This is recommended in the following cases:

Reviewer 3: There's a mixup here a bit. It is forced automatically only on validation failure. But it is also recommended to switch to dump-restore mode if there are multiple failures.

>     This is a one-time database copy from the v3 to v4 node, unlike live replication. This is recommended in the following cases:

Reviewer: Fixed it now.

>     This is a one-time database copy from the v3 to v4 node, unlike live replication. This is recommended in the following cases:

Reviewer 3: So I'd replace the 3 rows Ravi mentioned with:
"This is a one-time database copy from the v3 to v4 node, unlike live replication. Database dump and restore will be forced automatically if AWS DMS data integrity check fails after multiple attempts. DMS may fail for other reasons but it does not trigger fallback to dump-restore mode because it is usually recoverable if replication is restarted. If DMS keeps failing then it is advised to force dump-restore mode manually by ticking the relevant checkbox."

>     This is a one-time database copy from the v3 to v4 node, unlike live replication. This is recommended in the following cases:

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377/commits/9908a3e6b93c05a6ca47c5448210ee7d3c236763

    * Database replication with AWS DMS fails to replicate the data correctly
    * Database replication with AWS DMS fails with validation errors

3. Once data transfer is complete, progress will be at 100%.

> 

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377/commits/43138c59eb55eef3c83d406d9f856520663c742e

> The migration page lists all the ongoing migrations, including the following information:

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377/commits/e35ae2451e62fc3355f4be1441de8d975fa87044

> The migration page lists all the ongoing migrations, including the following information:

Author: Is the information displayed on the migration page the same for both AWS DMS and dump/restore?

> The migration page lists all the ongoing migrations, including the following information:

Reviewer 3: It is pretty much the same. The only difference is that there's indication what mode (DMS or dump-restore) is used.

> The migration page lists all the ongoing migrations, including the following information:

Author: Great - no change needed there either.

* The source and target environments
* The UUID of the source production environment
* Whether the tool is current **Replicating** data to the V4 environment or is **Stopped**
* What proportion of the source data has been replicated, listed for both files and database – this will sometimes show zero
    * If replication isn't running
    * During the replication process when the process checks whether files are synchronized
* The UUID of the target production environment

> * A button to **Stop replication** with an **Interrupt** option if the tool is currently replicating or a **Start replication** option if the tool is currently stopped

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377/commits/0212b6555d689a7bf9b6965e2f094d49a61fde28

*  The **Migrate button** which triggers the [final migration](#final-migration)

>     ![Status of the Migration](attachments/migrating-to-v4/migration-status.png)

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377/commits/ad675f5d3e842c01a04fce8935f296afa6a9af5a

    {{% alert type="info" %}}Any data you add to the database during the test will be overwritten when the migration process is restarted.{{% /alert %}}

7. Stop your V4 app at the end of the test and restart the replication so you can continue to copy data from your V3 app.

### 4.5 Final Migration{#final-migration}

Once you have tested the data migration you are ready to migrate your app to Mendix Cloud V4.

{{% alert type="warning" %}}
The final migration will only check that *production* data has been completely transferred to the new V4 app.

If you want to keep all your test and acceptance data, you need to review the migration status yourself. We recommend that you do this before initiating the final migration, but you can migrate non-production data after the final migration if necessary.
{{% /alert %}}

{{% alert type="info" %}}
We recommend that you allow at least an hour between starting to replicate the data (section 4.3, above) and starting the final migration. This is because we reduce the TTL for the DNS records at the beginning of the process, but this will take some time to propagate and allow us to switch quickly between your V3 and V4 app.
{{% /alert %}}

> 

Reviewer: ```
It is important to note that if you have forced database dump restore during the initial replication or it was automatically turned on due to a detected failure with AWS DMS replication in that case the final migration will have considerable downtime.
The displayed times on the `Migration Status` page depict how much time the last operation took (be it file sync or database dump restore). These timings add to downtime, but as file sync and dump-restore are run in parallel, only the bigger one will contribute directly to the downtime.
 ```

Reviewer 3: Also worth adding:
"It is also recommended to stop replication at least once because upon stop there are more operations that take additional time. If the replication is stopped, last operation timing will include these additional operations thus being more accurate."

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377/commits/e6f292ba50876ddd5ef1ca6847c9bd7372de2dc8

##### 4.3.1.1 Process with AWS DMS {#aws-dms}

1. Open the [Migration Tool](https://v3-v4-migration.mendixcloud.com/), `https://v3-v4-migration.mendixcloud.com/`.

2. Choose the Mendix Cloud v3 app from the list of apps for which you are the technical contact.

3. The target v4 app node will be filled with the name `<current-app-name>-v4`.

4. Select the source and target environments. In most cases, these will have the same name. For example, you want to replicate data from the v3 `production` environment to the v4 `production` environment. Please note you should not check the **Force database dump restore** check box.

    ![Select v3 node and environment](attachments/migrating-to-v4/select-v3-node-to-migrate.png)

5. Ensure that the app in the target v4 environment is stopped. You cannot replicate data into an app that is running.

6. Click **Replicate data and files**.

>     The replication process will copy all the data in the database, and files based on `FileDocument` entities, such as images, which are stored in the storage of the v3 appnode.

Author: Are you still happy with keeping this about `FileDocument` entities? There doesn't seem to be a resolution to this discussion (https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377#discussion_r678380965).

Reviewer 3: I've added a comment in the original thread. @ravi4mendix what do you think?

Author: [Repeat of my other response]
The thing about a `FileDocument` entity is that it is just a pointer to a file on disk. So when the app wants the content, it actually pulls it from a file, rather than from the table.
But I suppose the customer could have done something else which created files which are _not_ FileDocuments, so I'll make it more general.
How about:
```suggestion
    The replication process will copy all the data in the database as well as all the files which are stored on the v3 appnode.
```

Author: Discussion moved to here: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/3377#discussion_r681749667

    The replication will continue to run, so any changes to the data while your v3 app is still running are reflected in the replicated data.

##### 4.3.1.2 Process with PostgreSQL Dump and Restore {#dump-restore}

1. Follow steps 1-5 above in the [Process with AWS DMS](#aws-dms) section.

> 2.  Select the **Force database dump restore** check box, then click **Replicate data and files**.

Author: Does the v3 app need to be stopped for this to work, or can you do a dump when the v3 app is running?

Reviewer 3: We can do the dump while it's still running. The only point when the app has to be stopped is final migration.

Author: Thanks - don't need to add anything here then.

{{% /alert %}}

#### 4.3.2 Checking the Migration Status

1. Click the **Migration** icon to see the status of your replications.

    ![Icon for migration page](attachments/migrating-to-v4/migration-page.png)
    
2. Once initial data transfer is complete, progress will be at 100%, but data will be kept synchronized from v3 to v4.

The migration page lists all the ongoing migrations, including the following information:

* The source and target environments
* The UUID of the source production environment
* Whether the tool is current **Replicating** data to the v4 environment or is **Stopped**
* What proportion of the source data has been replicated, listed for both files and database – this will sometimes show zero
    * If replication isn't running
    * During the replication process when the process checks whether files are synchronized
* The UUID of the target production environment

> * The **Stop replication** button with an **Interrupt** option if the tool is currently replicating 

Author: What is the difference between interrupt and not interrupt? Can we be clearer for the customer?
My assumption is:
1) Without interrupt, the stop button will not stop immediately but will continue until replication is 100%
2) For AWS DMS with interrupt, the stop button will stop the replication immediately, leaving the replication possibly incomplete and inconsistent
3) For dump/restore with interrupt, the incomplete dump will be thrown away.

Can you confirm or correct this?

Reviewer 3: 1. Correct
2. Correct
3. The dump being taken on v3 is streamed directly to restore on v4, thus if it's interrupted only part of data will be present on v4. Which basically means the database is incomplete and unusable.

Reviewer 3: The whole idea behind exposing the interrupt feature is to give a user the ability to correct mistakes. For example, if he selected wrong environments.

Author: I think it would be nice to make it a bit more explicit? How about the following?
```suggestion
* The **Stop replication** button with an **Interrupt** option if the tool is currently replicating
    * if you click **Stop replication** the replication will stop when all the data is replicated
    * if you check the **Interrupt** option, replication will stop immediately when you click **Stop replication** leaving the v4 database in an incomplete and probably inconsistent state
```

Reviewer 3: "if you check the **Interrupt** option, replication will stop immediately" - I'd say "replication will terminate running operation as soon as possible". It's not exactly immediately because it'd still do some cleanup before marking it fully stopped.

Author: Have updated the suggestion above ☝️

    6. Restarts both the new v4 app and the original v3 app.

### 4.6 Rollback

If you encounter issues with your app when running on Mendix Cloud v4, then you can revert to the Mendix Cloud v3 version. This could happen, for example, if one of the differences between v3 and v4 listed above causes an unexpected issue.

* Click **Rollback** on the migration page. This does the following

    1. Stops the app running on Mendix Cloud v4
    2. Stops the app running on Mendix Cloud v3
    3. Renames the subdomain of the app running on Mendix Cloud v4 and **all** environments to be `<current-app-name>-v4`
    4. Removes the `-v3` suffix from the subdomain name of the original v3 app and **all** environments
    5. Restarts the original v3 app

{{% alert type="warning" %}}
This will not copy any new data from the v4 environment back to the v3 environment. Any data added to the v4 database before the rollback is effectively lost.
{{% /alert %}}

### 4.7 Issues

The following issues might occur, or you might decide to "Rollback" a successful migration.

#### 4.7.1 Data Replication Fails or Times Out

> If the replication process fails during the final migration, or it times out (the timeout is fixed at 20 minutes), then the apps and environments will not be renamed and the apps in the original v3 environments will be restarted.

Author: Is this only relevant for AWS DMS, or is there a 20 minute timeout on dump/restore as well?

Reviewer 3: Oh my, we totally missed this. Thanks for catching it. We'll have to think how to better organize this on the backend.

Reviewer 3: Right, now I remembered. In case of dump-restore mode, we were thinking to add measured time of the last dump-restore operation to these 20 minutes. This measured time is shown in the interface.

This is not implemented yet, but I'll do it today if there's no opposition.

Author: So can I say:
```suggestion
If the replication process fails during the final migration, or it times out (the timeout is fixed at 20 minutes for AWS DMS — for dump restore it is 20 minutes longer than the duration of the previous replication), then the apps and environments will not be renamed and the apps in the original v3 environments will be restarted.
```

Reviewer 3: "duration of previous replication" may not be right away clear to the customer. I'd say something like "for dump-restore it is set to 20 minutes plus measured operation time, which is displayed in the UI".

Author: Have updated the suggestion above ☝️

{{% /alert %}}

#### 4.3.2 Checking the Migration Status

1. Click the **Migration** icon to see the status of your replications.

    ![Icon for migration page](attachments/migrating-to-v4/migration-page.png)
    
2. Once initial data transfer is complete, progress will be at 100%, but data will be kept synchronized from v3 to v4.

The migration page lists all the ongoing migrations, including the following information:

* The source and target environments
* The UUID of the source production environment
* Whether the tool is current **Replicating** data to the v4 environment or is **Stopped**
* What proportion of the source data has been replicated, listed for both files and database – this will sometimes show zero
    * If replication isn't running
    * During the replication process when the process checks whether files are synchronized
* The UUID of the target production environment
* The **Stop replication** button with an **Interrupt** option if the tool is currently replicating
    * if you click **Stop replication** without checking the **Interrupt** option, the replication will stop when all the data is replicated

>     * if you check the **Interrupt** option, replication will stop as soon as possible when you click **Stop replication** leaving the v4 database in an incomplete and probably inconsistent state

Reviewer: Can we add one more piece of information here
```
if you check the **Interrupt** option, replication will stop as soon as possible when you click **Stop replication** leaving the v4 database in an incomplete and probably inconsistent state. In the UI you will see the state as failed when you select this option.
```

Reviewer: Thanks for fixing this. Let's publish it now. We can always improve it. :)
